## Step 1: Learning
In the moment, one can be (and often is) distracted without realizing it. There is an exception to this, though, which we might call the "recovery". When meditating, one proceeds through several cycles of attempting to hold one's attention on an object of focus (the breath, for example), eventually failing and becoming distracted, and then (sometime later) recognizing the distraction and returning to the object of focus. This moment of realization is the "recovery". In that moment, one can be sure that one was previously distracted but is now focused again.

In the mind-wandering literature, the recovery is called a "self-caught report". This is in contrast to probe-caught methods, which involve an external prompt to asses the current object of focus. Smallwood and Schooler (2006)<sup>[[1](https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F0033-2909.132.6.946)]</sup> explain that these two measures differ in that the "probe-caught method provides an estimate of how often mind-wandering episodes occur, whereas the self-caught method provides an estimate of the awareness of mind-wandering." We are interested in modeling this awareness, and so we use the self-caught method.

Simplistically, one can think of this as a simple state machine or an HMM with two latent states: focus and distraction. At any time _t_, the meditator can stay in their current state or transition to the other. When transitioning from distraction to focus, the meditator realizes their previous distracted state and signals a recovery.

[[resources/state-machine.jpg]]

If the meditator's biosignals are being recorded along with the times of these recoveries, then for each recovery we have two labeled time periods: the moments preceding a recovery are "distraction", and those following (up to a point) are "focus". 

The meditator signals a recovery by pressing a button. To minimizes noise in the signal due to movement, the button is positioned such that only a small movement of the index finger is needed to press it. Depending on the meditator's hand position while meditating, either the button is resting in their palm (palm up) or their finger is resting on the button (palm down).

By repeating this process many times and with many subjects, we collect a dataset from which we can learn to detect distraction. This is supported by experimental evidence, which shows that biosignals such as heart rate and skin conductivity are elevated while mind-wandering (Smallwood et al., 2007).<sup>[[2](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02699930600911531)]</sup>

In the mind-wandering literature, the question of self-report accuracy is often raised. Yet this is usually in the context of possibly under-reporting of mind-wandering frequency. For example, Schooler and Schreiber (2004)<sup>[[3](https://labs.psych.ucsb.edu/schooler/jonathan/sites/labs.psych.ucsb.edu.schooler.jonathan/files/pubs/schooler_schreiber_2004_-_paradox_of_introspection.pdf)]</sup> recommend that the reliability of self-report be tested by examining its correlation with "environmental, behavioral, and physiological concommitants of experience". However, we are not interested in learning to estimate mind-wandering frequency. We choose the self-report method because of its higher specificity. In other words, in our data collection we choose to maximize the accuracy of reports and acknowledge that we will miss many (perhaps even most) instances of mind-wandering. We do this to ensure as clean a training set for our detector algorithm as possible.

## Step 2: Training
Once a reliable method for detecting distraction has been established, we can use it in our closed-loop system. Once again, the subject is asked to meditate while their biosignals are recorded. Now, however, we can detect distraction before the subject is aware of it themselves. When we do, we allow the subject a "grace period" to recover on their own. When the grace period elapses, we provide a subtle queue (e.g. a bell chime) to bring the subject's focus back to the present, and so the cycle repeats. By progressively shortening these "grace periods", we train the subject to recognize and detach from their distraction more quickly. If this training transfers to other aspects of life, I believe it can seriously alleviate emotional suffering.

## References
1. [Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. *Psychological bulletin, 132*(6), 946.](https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F0033-2909.132.6.946)
2. [Smallwood, J., O'Connor, R. C., Sudbery, M. V., & Obonsawin, M. (2007). Mind-wandering and dysphoria. *Cognition and Emotion, 21*(4), 816-842.](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02699930600911531)
3. [Schooler, J., & Schreiber, C. A. (2004). Experience, meta-consciousness, and the paradox of introspection. *Journal of consciousness studies, 11*(7-8), 17-39.](https://labs.psych.ucsb.edu/schooler/jonathan/sites/labs.psych.ucsb.edu.schooler.jonathan/files/pubs/schooler_schreiber_2004_-_paradox_of_introspection.pdf)